# Classical Crypto systems and Core Concepts

## Week 1

__Learning Objectives__

- Explain what is "cryptography".
- Distinguish between codes and ciphers.
- Describe "cryptanalysis".
- Identify modern guiding principles of cryptography.

### Lesson 1. What is Cryptography?

- What is cryptography?
    - The art and science of secret communication.
    - Cast of characters:
        - Good guys: Alice and Bob
        - Bad guys: Eve and Malory
    - basic terms: plaintext, ciphertext, encrypt, decrypt.

- What are the goals of cryptography?
    - Threat model: Read, Change, Forge.
    - Information security goals:
        - confidentiality - can't read our messages
        - integrity - can't change our messages
        - authenticity - can't forge our messages
    - Message key is the minimum amount of information Bob needs to decrypt Alice's message which is key secret from Eve.
    - Steganography: is the practice of hiding a secret message in something that is not secret.

- Further Readings:
    - [Cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptography)
    - [Timeline of cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_cryptography)
    - [History of cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_cryptography)

### Lesson 2. Codes and Ciphers

- Codes vs Ciphers
    - Code involves replaces concepts with symbols. It is the meaning behind the message and not the form of the message that is encoded.
    - Cipher is when basic elements of an arbitrary message such as characters of text, or bits and bytes of digital data are enciphered without regard to what they mean within the message. Early ciphers fell into two categories, the transposition cipher and the substitution cipher.

- Transposition ciphers
    - Transposition ciphers is a cipher in which the letters that make up the plain text message are only rearranged.
    - First known example: scytale - the cipher text is generated by splitting the plain text into N strings, where N is the number of characters that can be written around the circumference of the Scytale. The N strings are then interleaved. The plaintext is recovered by taking every nth letter of the ciphertext to form the first group and then doing this N times, each time beginning with the next letter from the start and then reading the result starting with the first group.

- __Problem Idea__: Can you create a 3D scytale using randomly generated configs, use it as a message key between two parties. If I then encode a message, how long would it take to break that message?

- Substitution ciphers
    - Substitution cipher is a cipher where each character in the plain text while retaining its corresponding position within the cipher text is substituted by different character.
    - Example: Caesar, Mary Queen of Scots, Vigenere
    - An example of a powerful substitution cipher is when you randomly assign a character a value from the alphabet, there are 26 characters in the alphabet, so a computer would have to search for 26!, which is about 4 x 10^26 possible mappings. So, we don't have to keep the algorithm secret, we have to keep the mappings secret.
    - But certain letters are used more frequently in a given language than others. Thus it is possible to make good guesses about the mappings between plain text characters and cipher text characters based on how frequently different cipher text letters appear. Using frequency analysis, you can decipher the message.

- __Problem Idea__: When trying to break caesar cipher, can you add like a next word prediction to speed things up?

- Monoalphabet vs Polyalphabetic
    - Monoalphabetic: means that each character in a plain text was converted to a character in a cipher text using the same substitution rule. The Caesar ciphers were very simple monoalphabetic cipher that had very few options for the possible substitution rules.
    - Polyalphabetic: is any cipher based on substitution, using multiple substitution alphabets.
    - Vigenere cipher is a Polyalphabetic cipher. It uses all possible Caesar shift ciphers and lets each letter in a key phrase, determine which of the possible ciphers to use for a given character in the plain text or the cipher text.

- Further Readings:
    - [Scytale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scytale)
    - [Caesar cipher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caesar_cipher)
    - [Polyalphabetic cipher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyalphabetic_cipher)
    - [Vigenère cipher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vigen%C3%A8re_cipher)
    - [Autokey cipher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autokey_cipher)
    - [Index of coincidence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Index_of_coincidence)
    - [Kasiski examination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kasiski_examination)
    - [Alan Turing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Turing)

### Lesson 3. What is Cryptanalysis?

- Enigma is a Polyalphabetic cipher on steroids. It can convert plaintext to ciphertext characters at any given time. However that mapping changes for each character. THe order in which the mappings occur is controlled by the configuration of the machine an its initial settings. These configurations change regularly.

- Computational Security: Quantifying the effort to break a cipher.
    - Brute Force Attack (BFA) – try every possible key
    - BFA requires O(key space) operations to break
    - Spurious messages: messages that are sensible, created from different key words but which may not actually be the plain text.
    - Unicity Distance: the amount of text that is expected to reduce the number of spurious messages to zero.
    - Weaknesses reduce the effort needed
    - Strength is number of keys needed to be tried
    - Computationally secure – best attack not much better than Brute Force
    - Colossus: designed and built at Bletchley to break the lorenz cipher was the first fully programmable digital computer.

- Vernam Cipher also known as One-Time Pad is mathematically secure. To create a one-time pad, you simply generate a very long string of random characters that will serve as the key, and give copies to both Alice and Bob. To use a one-time pad, you simply combine the plain text with the key, character by character, to produce the ciphertext. The recipient does the same thing with their copy of the key, only in reverse, to recover the plain text. The security of the algorithm stems from the fact that the key is completely random, such that any character in the key could literally be any character. The problem with a one-time pad is that as the name implies, it can only be used once. Another problem is that it requires vast quantities of key material.

- Further Readings:
    - [One-time pad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-time_pad)
    - [Cryptology and Data Secrecy : The Vernam Cipher](http://www.pro-technix.com/information/crypto/pages/vernam_base.html)
    - [Enigma machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enigma_machine)
    - [Cryptanalysis of the Enigma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptanalysis_of_the_Enigma)
    - [Venona project](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venona_project)

### Lesson 4. Modern Guiding Principles

- Kerckhoffs' Principle: states that a cryptosystem should remain secure, even if the adversary knows every detail of the system, except the key. This underscores the need to safeguard the security of the key, which opens its own Pandora's box of complications. Included in this is the key _distribution problem_, the resulting desirability of _public key cryptosystems_ and the need and role for _trusted third parties_.

- Historical cryptosystems relied on secret algorithms, this was called security through obscurity. This was bad cause if the algorithm became public, the key was easily broken.

- Auguste Kerckhoffs’ design principles
    - System should not have complex rules
    - Algorithms shouldn’t need to be secret
    - Security should rely on simple keys

- Key distribution problem: reflects the difficulty generating sufficient key material, securely distributing it to the parties that need it, and being able to detect when and if there's been a compromise. An alternative is to have large groups of users share a common key, to reduce the total number of keys to a manageable level. The problem here is that the the larger the group, the more valuable a key compromise becomes to your adversary.

- Public key cryptography was devised as an alternative to the key distribution problem. The idea was to use two different but related keys such that two people can communicate securely as long as each one has one of the keys. This is what is known as _asymmetric cryptography_. We make one of the keys public knowledge, say Alice can generate both keys, keep one all to herself and publish the other for Bob to look up.

- Trent distributes secret symmetric keys
    - Trusted to give the right key
    - Trusted to not give the key to anyone else
    - Trusted to not keep a copy of the key

- Trent publishes public asymmetric keys
    - Trusted to properly associate key with owner
    - Trusted to vet the identity of the key owner
    - Trusted to verify the owner of a key to others

- Further Readings:
    - [Kerckhoffs's principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerckhoffs%27s_principle)

---
## Week 2

__Learning Objectives__
- 
- 

### Lesson 5. Types of Attacks


- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 6. Frequency Analysis of Monoalphabetic Ciphers - Single-Character Frequencies


- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 7. Frequency Analysis of Monoalphabetic Ciphers - Multi-Character Frequencies


- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 8. Frequency Analysis for Monoalphabetic Ciphers - Example


- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 9. Key Length Determination in Polyalphabetic Ciphers


- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 10. Example of Cracking a Vigenere Cipher


- Further Readings:
    - []()







---
## Week 3

__Learning Objectives__
- 
- 

### Lesson 11. What is a Hash Function?



- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 12. How are Cryptographic Hash Functions Used?



- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 13. How are Cryptographic Hash Functions Attacked? Part I



- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 14. How are Cryptographic Hash Functions Attacked? Part II



- Further Readings:
    - []()

### Lesson 15. What Properties Should a Cryptographic Hash Function Have?



- Further Readings:
    - []()


---
# My Notes

- __Breaking the Vigenere cipher__: The method relied on the analysis of gaps between repeated fragments in the ciphertext; such analysis can give hints as to the length of the key used. This technique is known as Kasiski examination.

- In cryptography, __coincidence counting__ is the technique (invented by William F. Friedman) of putting two texts side-by-side and counting the number of times that identical letters appear in the same position in both texts. This count, either as a ratio of the total or normalized by dividing by the expected count for a random source model, is known as the index of coincidence, or IC for short. Because letters in a natural language are not distributed evenly, the IC is higher for such texts than it would be for uniformly random text strings. What makes the IC especially useful is the fact that its value does not change if both texts are scrambled by the same single-alphabet substitution cipher, allowing a cryptanalyst to quickly detect that form of encryption.




---
# Summary


---
# Questions

